# A machine learning approach to extract oncogenic transcriptional profiles and to expand precision oncology

 ### ABSTRACT
 
*The accurate identification of somatic mutations has become a pivotal component of tumor profiling and precision medicine. Yet, there is still a fraction of cancer patients without any known genomic biomarker (The ICGC/TCGA Consortium, Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes, Nature 2020), demonstrating the need for alternative biomarkers to help clinical decision making. We reasoned that **driver mutations activating specific downstream signaling pathways are manifested as transcriptional signatures that can be leveraged to predict the potential pathogenicity and actionability of rare mutations** (Rodon et al., Genomic and Transcriptomic Profiling Expands Precision Cancer Medicine: The WINTHER Trial, Nature medicine 2019). Therefore, we developed **logistic regression classifiers** to learn the transcriptomic profiles associated with hotspot driver mutations in 16 oncogenes using data obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (**TCGA**) and used the classifiers to infer pathway activation status in cancers without such hotspot driver mutations. In particular, our approach incorporated the Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE) to overcome the imbalance of the input classes, as a result of the general rarity of samples with hotspot driver mutations. Our approach was first tested on the _PIK3CA_ oncogene and its E542, E545 and H1047 driver hotspot mutations leading to a mean area under receiver operator curve (ROC) score of 0.87 on a validation dataset. The same approach was then further applied to an additional 15 oncogenes, demonstrating a correlation between the sensitivity of the models and the fraction of samples with hotspot mutations in the training dataset. Finally, using the model on samples with _PIK3CA_ non-hotspot mutations and _PIK3CA_ known interactors, leading to the identification of the transcriptomic profile associated to the _PIK3CA_ hotspot driver mutations in samples with other known oncogenic mutations. Results obtained show that **transcriptomic data can be used to infer the presence of oncogenic transcriptional profiles in patients and can potentially be leveraged to help expand precision medicine**.*


The classifier has been build using Python3.

Please find the Jupyther ipynb file with additional information and the code of the Python script.
